---
# Documentation: https://sourcethemes.com/academic/docs/managing-content/

title: "The Link Between Presence and Avatar Appearance"
subtitle: "Does presence depend on what your virtual avatar looks like?"
summary: ""
authors: []
tags: []
categories: []
date: 2020-10-08T23:13:03+01:00
lastmod: 2020-10-08T23:13:03+01:00
featured: false
draft: false

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder.
# Focal points: Smart, Center, TopLeft, Top, TopRight, Left, Right, BottomLeft, Bottom, BottomRight.
image:
  caption: ""
  focal_point: ""
  preview_only: false

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this post with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's folder or file name without extension.
#   E.g. `projects = ["internal-project"]` references `content/project/deep-learning/index.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects = []`.
projects: []
---

One of the key attractions of virtual reality is that it frees users from constraints they face in their everyday lives. Avatars allow users to free themselves from their ‘corporeality’ and affords ordinary people with the extra-ordinary ability to take on new forms at will. However, as their virtual selves become more and more different from their real-life self, how does this affect the user’s experience of inhabiting their virtual avatar, and indeed, how does it affect the user’s perception that they have actually been transported to a virtual world? Examining self-avatars, or avatars viewed from a first- person perspective within Immersive Virtual Realities, we find that avatar appearance greatly affects how readily an individual takes a virtual body to be their own, which ultimately affects the level of presence they feel within the virtual world around them.

What is presence?
-----------------
The term presence may be seen to stem from “Telepresence”, first coined in 1980 to describe the phenomenon of human operators feeling the sense that they had been physically transported to a remote workstation via a teleoperating system [1], for example in the context of Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROV), the operator feels as if they have been transported to the space of the ROV. Although precise use of the term ‘presence’ in the context of virtual environments often suffers from inconsistencies, it is fundamentally understood to align with the idea of an individual’s sense of ‘being there’ in a virtual world, as well as their ability to ‘act’ in the virtual environment. In a 2004 literature review [2] on the use of the term within virtual environments, the authors described presence to be “a psychological state in which the virtuality of the experience is unnoticed”, going on to further state that presence can be divided into distinct subdomains reflective of how we perceive the real world around us.

Social presence is defined as “a psychological state in which virtual social actors are experienced as actual social actors in either sensory or non-sensory ways”. In other words, for an individual to be socially present, they must not notice the para-authenticity of mediated humans or ‘the artificiality of simulated non-human actors’. Furthermore, in much the same way we can often feel to be not ‘present’, or disengaged, in uninteresting company, the richness of an individual’s interaction with other actors in the virtual world also contributes to this sense of social presence. More introspectively, there is self-presence. Self-presence is described as “a psychological state in which the virtual self is experienced as the actual self in either sensory or non-sensory ways”, when users no longer notice the virtuality of either the ‘para-authentic’ representation of their own selves, or an artificially constructed other-self inside a virtual environment. This last point is of interest, as it references the idea that we can have an ‘other-self’ representation within the virtual world, divergent from our real-world self, in appearance and otherwise, but still maintain a sense of self-presence. To further explore this idea of transportation of the self, or indeed having multiple selves then perhaps it is useful to define what ‘self’ is.

Self
----
Self is a highly plastic construct. Some behavioural and social researchers may consider the concept of ‘self’ to be purely a neurological concept [3], analogous to our psyche or personality, others, however, (and for the purpose of this essay we will adopt this definition) consider the ‘self as a total person’. The psychologist William James first formalized this holistic definition of self, with the description that it is the “sum total of all that he can call his, not only his body and his psychic powers, but his clothes, his house, his wife, ancestors, friends, his reputation...” [4]. According to this definition therefore, our perception of self is tied not only to internalized beliefs and goals, but is also shaped by our social circles, our physical body and even the clothes we wear. Understanding this multifaceted nature of self is critical to understanding the relationship between an individual and their self-avatar representation and to understanding the link between self, social presence and self-presence.

Self-Avatars
------------
As mentioned by James, our sense of self is shaped in part by our actual physical manifestation in the world. How we experience the world is inextricably tied to being inside a physical body. A body that moves as we intend it to, a body that, as we interact with others, provide important social cues and feeds back to us information about location and posture as well as our self-perception of the world around us. Our experience of the body is the result of the interplay of a number of different perceptual streams: vision, touch, proprioception (perception of movement), interoception (internal feelings: hotness; coldness etc.), motor control and vestibular sensations. When using fully immersive virtual environments (IVE) that make use of head mounted displays (HMD), the participant’s body is occluded. A lack of body representation, or avatar, has been shown [5, 6] to lead to the phenomenon of disembodiment, a sort of ‘out of body experience’, and the perception that one’s sense of self is not localised to any bodily borders, which in turn reduces any sense of self-presence.

This phenomenon is not unique to the domain of virtual environments. A number of different neurological conditions such as stroke or nerve damage may also lead to the case where an individual no longer feels a body part to belong to them. As mentioned previously, our experience of the body is reliant on several forms of sensory input. Nerve damage in an individual’s arm, for example, would lead to a mismatch between the visual experience and tactile experience of grasping an object. It is believed that this mismatch in senses is what leads to the perception of the individual that the affected body part is an ‘alien, disembodied object’[7]. This would be analogous to the mismatch in senses felt by avatar-less users of HMDs, resultant from the lack of visual feedback during body movement.

To counter this, IVEs may make use of a rendered self-avatar.
A self-avatar is an avatar collocated with the user that can replicate the motions and postures of the user using a body tracking system. This self-avatar provides a substitute ‘virtual body’, depicted from the first-person perspective of the user’s eyes [8]. As stroke patients can suffer from dis-ownership of a body part, peculiarly, they can also misattribute other people’s limbs to be a part of themselves. Recreating this sense of ownership in healthy individuals with respect to their virtual body, or self- avatar, is a necessary prerequisite for generating a sense of self-presence. As disembodiment referred to lack of ownership of a body in an avatar-less experience, inducing embodiment therefore describes the sense of an individual’s perceived ownership over the body of their self-avatar, the avatar’s co- location, agency as well as external appearance [9]. With a strong sense of embodiment, the user would feel the self-avatar has essentially replaced their own physical body at a functional level, with any sensory input the user feels felt to originate from the self-avatar, thus the ‘virtual self is experienced as the actual self’. As a mismatch in senses is believed to be responsible for feelings of disembodiment, is the perception of embodiment generated simply by aligning our sensory inputs?

Embodiment
----------
In a now famous experiment [10] conducted in 1998, participants watched a rubber hand being stroked, whilst their own obscured hand was synchronously stroked. During the trial participants felt not only as if the sense of touch originated from the location where they saw the rubber hand touched, but also as that the rubber hand was their own. After the trial was over, it was noted there seemed to be a drift in perceived position of the participant’s actual hand from the true position to the position of the rubber hand. This combination of synchronized tactile and visual input from the action of being stroked, lead to a shift in the proprioception of the trial participant as their tactile perceptions were projected onto the rubber hand, ultimately leading it to feel as if it were a part of the participants body, or that they had ownership over the rubber hand. Even though the hand was dissimilar to the participant’s hand in appearance with its texture quite different to that of human skin, it was still possible to stimulate ownership. The result has been successfully replicated with a virtual hand in an IVE [11], while in later studies, it has been found that similar ownership illusions can be triggered using other modalities of multisensory integration, such as visual sensorimotor congruent stimulation from movement of a virtual hand [12]. Is it the case therefore that any form of virtual object or self- avatar be experienced as part of one’s own body, so long as there is alignment of senses?

Anthropomorphism of the virtual body
------------------------------------
The rubber hand experiment has since led to further research exploring the limitations of ownership. Researchers have attempted and failed to generate the ownership illusion using objects massively different from the form of the human hand, such as wooden sticks [13]. Building on this, in 2010 [14], researchers compared the results obtained with a rubber hand with those obtained using a wooden stick that was progressively transformed into an increasingly hand like form. It was found that even as the wooden object became more hand like (shown in Figure 1), even sharing some structural features such as fingers and a wrist, the participants did not feel as strong a sense of ownership of the hand, nor did they experience the same sort of perceptual drift experienced with the rubber hand.

This is perhaps illustrative of the idea that the ownership illusion is not solely dependent on low level multi-sensory input. There are in fact two relevant factors at play that help trigger the illusion [7], not just ‘bottom up’ physiological factors related to multisensory integration, such as synchronous visual and tactile sensory inputs, but also more cognitive high level ‘top-down’ factors, that are related to the conceptual interpretation of the observed artificial or virtual body part. It would seem therefore, that there is a limit to what can be experienced as one’s own body, which comes in the form of key anatomical constraints. In order for a user to experience ownership of a self-avatar, the appearance of this avatar must align with some internalized reference model of the body, outlining structural information of the human form, and, that not any form of object or avatar can be experienced as part of one’s body. This reference model distinguishes between corporeal objects and non-corporeal, which is perhaps necessary in maintaining a coherent idea of body-schema and self.

Similarly, there is evidence for the two-factor model in the case of full body ownership. In a trial conducted in 2007 [15], participants wore an HMD, which was fed by the video feed of a head mounted camera worn by either another trial participant, a mannequin, or placed on a wooden block. The field of view was fixed, as the participants looked down at their body for the duration of the trial. Participants who were body swapped with other real people experienced the strongest sense of body ownership. With synchronous visual-tactile stimulation, it was possible to generate a strong sense of ownership amongst those body swapped with a mannequin. Unsurprisingly however, no sense of ownership was felt amongst those body swapped with the wooden block despite this multisensory input, highlighting the need to preserve certain corporeal structures for an object to be integrable as part of oneself.

How body ownership is affected as the virtual body diverges from the true human form, in the context of IVEs, was further explored in 2013 [16]. Participants were given either a gender matched realistic human self-avatar, or a plastic mannequin self-avatar. Despite the synchronous visual sensorimotor cues provided by the HMD’s head tracking, the number of participants who felt ownership of the mannequin avatar remained fairly low. It was possible however to generate a vivid illusion amongst those using the mannequin avatar when accompanied with synchronous visual tactile input. Across touch conditions, participants experienced much higher levels of illusion when experiencing the realistic body. Interestingly, it was found that it was possible to preserve the body ownership illusion even in the condition of asynchronous visual tactile input amongst those using the realistic avatar.

This result further builds on the idea of a high-level cognitive process impacting ownership and suggests that once an object meets an internalized reference to anthropomorphic anatomical constraints, the intensity of the illusion is modulated not only by synchronous sensory input, but also by the visual fidelity of the object to be adopted. The result suggests that a deficiency in one modulating factor can be made up by the other, that is if the visual realism is high enough, discrepancies in the ‘bottom up’ factors may have less of an impact on maintaining the illusion of ownership. In this case, it would seem the closer a self-avatar’s appearance is to the individual’s real- life perception of their body, the easier it is to generate a sense of ownership, and accordingly a sense of self-presence.

Although there is much research into how avatar realism affects feelings of embodiment and self- presence, research into how social-presence is affected by realism is still sparse. It would seem intuitive that interacting with other more human-like, realistic forms of avatar would facilitate feelings of social presence more readily than an unrealistic form, and that feelings of warmth and of rapport would come more readily when interacting with virtual actors of more human like forms. However, a study in 2017 [17] suggested the relationship between visual realism and social presence is less clear cut. The study compared participant responses from those using a realistic self-avatar generated by 3D depth scanning of a person of similar age and gender, with those using an unrealistic wooden mannequin self-avatar, shown in Figure 2, within the context of an immersive social virtual environment (ISVE). The trial made use of a ‘virtual mirror’ allowing participants to see the reflection of their avatar and therefore helped to induce a sense of body ownership by creating synchronous visual sensorimotor feedback.

Although as expected, individuals with the realistic avatar experienced a far stronger sense of body ownership and self-presence, no clear relationship between realism of avatars and social-presence was found. Interestingly, more participants rated other users with a wooden mannequin avatar to be more attractive than those with a realistic avatar, which they found to be more ‘eerie’. The trial’s authors attributed this to a potential ‘uncanny valley’ effect. The realistic, human-like avatars of the others created an expectation amongst individuals observing the avatar, for more realistic human like behavioural norms. When these norms were not met, (on account of the unmoving facial features during interaction), this led to a sense of discomfort, reducing the sense of social presence. This is in line with previous studies [18], showing a mismatch in visual and behavioural realism leads to reduced feelings of social presence, and that low visual realism and behavioural realism may actually lead to greater feelings of social presence than when there is a divergence between the two.

Interestingly, the trial also revealed how the appearance of other actors in a virtual environment can have an effect on an individual’s own sense of self-presence. It was found that individuals, regardless of their own self-avatar form, when observing others with realistic avatars were much more likely to experience their own real-body undergoing a sensation of ‘change’. This suggests that in ISVEs, the more realistic others’ avatars are in appearance, the greater the impression of the changed self and greater acceptance of the self-avatar. As James stated, self is not just the ‘body and psychic powers’, but also ‘friends and family’. It may be the case, therefore, that as the actors surrounding an individual’s self-avatar become truer to those in their real-world social system, this leads to a greater perception of being transported to the virtual world, into the body of the virtual self.

Convergence to self
-------------------
Although the research mentioned thus far has explored the difference in levels of embodiment felt as self-avatar appearance diverges from the human form, it is interesting to note how self-presence is affected as an individual’s avatar appearance becomes more personalized, and truer in appearance to the specific individual. In a trial in 2018 [19], individuals were embodied in self-avatars that varied between a hand modelled generic version (of similar age and gender to the participant), a generic scanned version, and an individualized scanned version, with high visual likeness to the participant (an example of each condition is shown in figure 3). The latter two conditions were generated by state-of-the-art photogrammetry method making use of 3D depth scans and consequently both were higher in degrees of graphical quality than the hand modelled self-avatar. During the trial, participants were stood in front of a virtual mirror to help invoke the illusion of ownership.

It was found that as expected, the greater the graphical quality of self-avatar, the greater the sense of body ownership and self-presence. Further to this, according to self-reports, it was found that of the two highly realistic bodies, the personalized self-avatar invoked a far greater sense of ownership and self-presence. This result indicates that a self-avatar’s likeness to the individual’s true appearance greatly facilitates generating high levels of body ownership and self-presence when levels of graphical quality are fixed. This perhaps further illustrates that as the virtual self becomes more and more like an individual’s true self, the easier it becomes for them to accept this virtual self as their own, and, experience a sense of self-presence in virtual reality.

Divergence to Self
------------------
Although it has been shown that increasing a self-avatar’s likeness to the true self is useful for facilitating a strong sense of self-presence, the divergence of self-avatar appearance from the user does not necessarily mean the body ownership illusion cannot be preserved. Indeed, with evidence that an individual can feel at least some level of body ownership over something as non-human as a mannequin, given enough congruent sensory input, it is reasonable to assume that it is possible to feel a strong sense of body ownership over a virtual body that diverges from the true self in a less pronounced, more human centric way, for example in characteristics such as skin colour.

Illustrating this, it has been shown that male participants can feel a female avatar’s body to be their own [20]. Participants who experienced a female avatar from a first-person perspective and later from an outside perspective, experienced a greater stress response (observing heart rate) when the female avatar was threatened, compared to those who observed the avatar from an external viewpoint for the entirety of the trial. Synchronous sensory input from was given in the form of either a virtual mirror, or via stroking of the shoulder. The strong empathic response felt by the males who experienced the avatar from a first-person perspective was correlated with the greater levels of embodiment, illustrating the strong sense of ownership felt by those individuals. The ability to take ownership of a virtual body different in appearance from our own has many applications in the treatment of innate bias, indeed ‘walking a mile in someone else’s (virtual) shoes’ has been shown that that embodying white participants in a dark-skinned virtual body (at least temporarily) led to a comparative reduction in implicit racial bias [21].

Stereotypes and self-presence
-----------------------------
Although the choice of self-avatar appearance may assist in reducing harmful stereotypes and perceptions held by individuals, another line of research shows how when given avatars divergent in visual characteristics from the participant’s true appearance, preconceived ideas and stereotypes about people with those characteristics can affect how an individual experiences their self-avatar. It may even be the case that stereotypes can help facilitate self-presence in particular contexts within IVEs.

The psychological impact of an individual’s avatar appearance on the user was first introduced in 2007 by researcher Nick Yee at Stanford University. It is perhaps obvious that an individual’s self- avatar may affect the behaviour of those around them, for example, using an attractive avatar may result in others being friendlier towards that individual. However, Yee noted that the visual appearance of an individual’s avatar can in fact have an effect on the psychology of the individual themselves, through what he termed as the ‘Proteus Effect’ [22]. Embodying a self-avatar different in appearance to the individual, may in fact lead to them adopting behaviours and beliefs that they perceive to be more typical or suitable for the avatar. Yee examined how self-avatar height influenced behaviour in an ISVE. He found that not only participants with taller avatars felt more confident within their virtual environment, but also that this shift in self-image extended beyond the virtual world into the real world. After the trial, users took part in face to face negotiations where it was found that participants that had embodied a tall avatar were much more willing to negotiate aggressively. Yee posits that this is illustrative that the appearance of a self-avatar has the potential to change, however temporarily, an individual’s beliefs and behaviours; that the virtual self has the ability to shape the real self. There is still uncertainty as to how this shift in self is or indeed affects levels of self-presence felt by individuals.

An alternative explanation for this marked shift in the adoption of stereotypical behaviours is, that rather than an individual conforming their behaviour to fit with their perception of the appearance of the self-avatar, it is the congruency of the local context, or task given within the virtual environment, with the appearance of the character that frees users to express certain stereotypical behaviours that they otherwise wouldn’t. In a trial [23] that invited Caucasian people to take part in a virtual West- African Djembe drum session within an IVE, embodying either a formally dressed light skinned self- avatar (FD group), or a casually dressed dark skinned self-avatar (CD group), the participants in the CD group exhibited a higher frequency of movement compared to those in the FD group. The trial authors argued that it was the perception that the CD avatar was more suited for the given task that led to the greater levels of movement and expression. This readiness for participants to more readily engage with the given task may be viewed as participants feeling a greater sense of self-presence and engagement with the virtual world, and their virtual body.

This may be seen to be supported by the results of an experiment done in 2013 [24] exploring the effects on prosocial behaviour of individuals embodied either as a super-hero, or as an ordinary tourist. Participants had to complete a series of tasks that involved helping a number of virtual actors. It was found that those using a super-hero self-avatar were more likely to show pro-social behaviour after the trial, whilst on average, they also reported higher levels of presence during the trial itself. It would seem that the stereotype for a super-hero to be a helper led to this avatar being seen as more fitting of the local context of the virtual environment, leading to higher levels of self-presence. Given how perceived congruency of avatar appearance with the local context may be a factor in generating self-presence, it may even be the case that embodying an avatar seen to fit better with the environment may invoke a stronger sense of presence than embodying an avatar with greater visual likeness to the user.

Conclusion
----------
From the discussion, it is clear that our sense of presence is highly dependent on what our virtual avatar looks like. Although we have found that there are certain limits to what may be adopted as a virtual body, it is clear that we are able to feel ownership over avatars wildly different from our real- world form. The discussion has also illustrated that the relationship between factors such as realism and presence is not so clear cut, with behavioural realism also impacting social presence when we engage with other actors in the virtual world. Finally, it is also interesting to note how the context of the virtual world may also dictate the importance of particular features of avatar appearance when generating presence, and how the success of these contextual cues may also rely on preconceived biases or stereotypes held by the user.
Images:
Figure 1: Transformation of the wooden block, with the rubber hand for comparison on the far right. Source: [14]
Figure 2: Two trial participants interacting, one embodied in a realistic self-avatar, the other in an unrealistic self-avatar. Source: [17]

 Figure 3: An example of a male generic avatar (top), generic scanned avatar (middle), individualized scanned avatar (bottom). Source: [19]

Bibliography
------------
[1] Minsky, M (June 1980). "Telepresence". MIT Press Journals: 45–51

[2] Lee, Kwan Min (February 2004). "Presence, Explicated". Communication Theory. 14 (1): 27–50

[3]Baumeister, R. F. (1999). The nature and structure of the self: An overview. The self in social psychology, 1-20.

[4] James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology, Vol. 2. NY, US: Henry Holt and Company.

[5] Murray, C. D., & Sixsmith, J. (1999). The corporeal body in virtual reality. Ethos, 27(3), 315-343.

[6] Blanke, O., & Metzinger, T. (2009). Full-body illusions and minimal phenomenal selfhood. Trends in cognitive sciences, 13(1), 7-13.

[7] Giummarra, M. J., Gibson, S. J., Georgiou-Karistianis, N., & Bradshaw, J. L. (2008). Mechanisms underlying embodiment, disembodiment and loss of embodiment. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 32(1), 143-160.

[8] Steed, A., Pan, Y., Zisch, F., & Steptoe, W. (2016, July). The impact of a self-avatar on cognitive load in immersive virtual reality. In 2016 IEEE Virtual Reality Conference (Vr) (Vol. 23, pp. 67-76). IEEE.

[9] Gonzalez-Franco, M. G. F., & Peck, T. C. (2018). Avatar Embodiment. Towards a Standardized Questionnaire. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 5, 74.

[10] Botvinick, M., & Cohen, J. (1998). Rubber hands ‘feel’touch that eyes see. Nature, 391(6669), 756.

[11] Yuan, Y., & Steed, A. (2010, March). Is the rubber hand illusion induced by immersive virtual reality?. In Virtual Reality Conference (VR), 2010 IEEE (pp. 95-102). IEEE.

[12] Tsakiris, M., Prabhu, G., & Haggard, P. (2006). Having a body versus moving your body: How agency structures body-ownership. Consciousness and cognition, 15(2), 423-432.

[13] Tsakiris, M., & Haggard, P. (2005). The rubber hand illusion revisited: visuotactile integration and self-attribution. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 31(1), 80.

[14] Tsakiris, M., Carpenter, L., James, D., & Fotopoulou, A. (2010). Hands only illusion: multisensory integration elicits sense of ownership for body parts but not for non-corporeal objects. Experimental Brain Research, 204(3), 343-352.

[15] Petkova, V. I., & Ehrsson, H. H. (2008). If I were you: perceptual illusion of body swapping. PloS one, 3(12), e3832.

[16] Maselli, A., & Slater, M. (2013). The building blocks of the full body ownership illusion. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 7, 83.

[17] Latoschik, M. E., Roth, D., Gall, D., Achenbach, J., Waltemate, T., & Botsch, M. (2017, November). The effect of avatar realism in immersive social virtual realities. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology (p. 39). ACM.

[18] Garau, M., Slater, M., Vinayagamoorthy, V., Brogni, A., Steed, A., & Sasse, M. A. (2003, April). The impact of avatar realism and eye gaze control on perceived quality of communication in a shared immersive virtual environment. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems(pp. 529-536). ACM.

[19] Waltemate, T., Gall, D., Roth, D., Botsch, M., & Latoschik, M. E. (2018). The Impact of Avatar Personalization and Immersion on Virtual Body Ownership, Presence, and Emotional Response. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 24(4), 1643-1652.

[20] Slater, M., Spanlang, B., Sanchez-Vives, M. V., & Blanke, O. (2010). First person experience of body transfer in virtual reality. PloS one, 5(5), e10564.

[21] Peck, T. C., Seinfeld, S., Aglioti, S. M., & Slater, M. (2013). Putting yourself in the skin of a black avatar reduces implicit racial bias. Consciousness and cognition, 22(3), 779-787.

[22] Yee, N., & Bailenson, J. (2007). The Proteus effect: The effect of transformed self-representation on behavior. Human communication research, 33(3), 271-290.

[23] Kilteni, K., Bergstrom, I., & Slater, M. (2013). Drumming in immersive virtual reality: the body shapes the way we play. IEEE Transactions on Visualization & Computer Graphics, (4), 597-605.

[24] Rosenberg, R. S., Baughman, S. L., & Bailenson, J. N. (2013). Virtual superheroes: Using superpowers in virtual reality to encourage prosocial behavior. PloS one, 8(1), e55003.
